URL: https://fairdataihub.org/sodaforsparc

SODA for SPARC | FAIR Data Innovations Hub
Projects
Team
Impact
Gallery
Blog
Events
Contact Us
Project
SODA
Software to organize data automatically
Streamlining FAIR data sharing
Download now
Explore the docs
Overview
SODA is a cross-platform desktop software that helps researchers prepare and share FAIR peripheral nervous system (PNS) related data and models using the SPARC Data Structure (SDS) and the SPARC Portal. Since 2021, SODA has been installed on over 1300 computers, empowering researchers worldwide.
What is SPARC?
The NIH's Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions (SPARC) program seeks to accelerate development of therapeutic devices that modulate electrical activity in nerves to improve organ function.
Learn more about SPARC
What are the FAIR SPARC Data Guidelines?
All SPARC-funded researchers must curate their datasets following the SPARC Data Standards (SDS) and share them openly on the Pennsieve data platform as per their funding agreement with SPARC.
Learn more about SDS
What are the challenges?
The guidelines are very exhaustive to maximize FAIRness of SPARC datasets but are challenging and time-consuming for researchers to implement.
What does SODA do?
SODA combines intuitive user interfaces and automation such that researchers can efficiently and accurately curate their SPARC datasets.
Impact on SPARC datasets
Trusted by researchers all over the world
0
TB
+
Data curated and shared
0
k+
Files curated and shared
0
Datasets published to SPARC.science
0
Downloads
Development approach
SODA is distributed as an open-source application with an MIT License. Anyone is free to fork our GitHub repository and make their own changes if they would like. If you would like to submit a feature modification, or feature suggestion, please feel free to submit an issue on the repository.
Explore the GitHub repository
Funding
SODA is funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)'s SPARC program. The funding was initially provided as a supplement to an existing SPARC award at CalMI during the first phase of development before now having a standalone award.
Explore the award on NIH Reporter
Team
Members
Researchers, engineers, and collaborators behind this project.
Bhavesh Patel
Sanjay Soundarajan
Christopher Marroquin
Jacob Clark
Dorian Portillo
Research partners
SODA for SPARC connects with several resources developed by the SPARC Data Resource Center (DRC) and we therefore collaborate actively with the DRC teams throughout our development process.
Pennsieve
FAIR Data Informatics Lab
MBF Bioscience
Timeline
Milestone
7
Phase VI development
Sept 2024 - Aug 2025
In the final phase of development the SODA team is focusing on bringing the SDS 3.0 to SODA and overall enhancing the user experience by simplifying UIs and presentation.
Milestone
6
Phase V development
Sept 2023 - Aug 2024
The SODA team improved the user interfaces of SODA and enhanced workflows to further simplify data submission for non-SPARC users and worked with the MBF team for integrated MicroFile+ and Biolucida with SODA (and more).
Milestone
5
Phase IV development
Sept 2022 - Aug 2023
The SPARC data curation and sharing worflows will be further streamlined. Full integration will be achieved with the SDS validator and the new Pennsieve upload method. Support will be provided for the submission of non-SPARC data.
Milestone
4
Phase III development
Sept 2021 - Aug 2022
Support is provided for the evolving SPARC guidelines. A Guided Mode is implement to further streamline data curation and sharing. Integration with the SDS validator is initiated.
Milestone
3
Phase II development
Sept 2020 - Aug 2021
The user interface is upgraded to become more intuitive, support is included for additional elements of the SDS, and the transition of SPARC from Blackfynn to Pennsieve is achieved.
Milestone
2
Phase I development
May 2019 - Aug 2020
The base framework of the software is developed and support for high-level requirements of the SDS are integrated.
Milestone
1
Birth of SODA
December 2018
The first prototype of SODA for SPARC is developed during the 2018 NIH SPARC Hackathon where it won the People's Choice Award.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Impact related to this project
Showing
5
publications
View all our impact
↗
SODA: Software to Support the Curation and Sharing of FAIR Autonomic Nervous System Data
Open
Copy
2024
Journal Articles
Marroquin, C., Clark, J., Portillo, D., Soundarajan, S., Ngo, T., & Patel, B. (2024). SODA: Software to Support the Curation and Sharing of FAIR Autonomic Nervous System Data. Journal of Open Source Software, 9(100), 6140, https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.06140
SPARC Data Structure: Rationale and Design of a FAIR Standard for Biomedical Research Data
Open
Copy
2021
Preprints
Bandrowski, A., Grethe, J. S., Pilko, A., Gillespie, T., Pine, G., Patel, B., Surles-Zeigler, M., & Martone, M. E. (2021). SPARC Data Structure: Rationale and Design of a FAIR Standard for Biomedical Research Data. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. BioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.10.430563
Sharing is Caring - Making SPARC data FAIR with SODA
Open
Copy
2021
Web Articles
SPARC Data Structure: Rationale and Design of a FAIR Standard for Biomedical Research Data. (2021). SPARC. https://sparc.science/news-and-events/community-spotlight/success-stories/sharing-is-caring-making-sparc-data-fair-with-soda
SPARC: SODA, an interactive software for curating SPARC datasets
Open
Copy
2020
Abstract
Patel, B., Srivastava, H., Aghasafari, P., & Helmer, K. (2020). SPARC: SODA, an interactive software for curating SPARC datasets. The FASEB Journal, 34(S1), 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1096/fasebj.2020.34.s1.02483
SODA (Software to Organize Data Automatically) for SPARC
Open
Copy
2019
Software
SODA. (started 2019). https://github.com/fairdataihub/SODA-for-SPARC (Development status: Active)
