URL: https://fairdataihub.org/eyeact

Eye ACT | FAIR Data Innovations Hub
Projects
Team
Impact
Gallery
Blog
Events
Contact Us
Project
Eye ACT
Seeing the Future of Brain Health Through the Eyes
Exploring how ophthalmic conditions can provide early indicators of Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative conditions.
Learn more
Coming soon
Visit the Envision Portal
Coming soon
Overview
The Eye ACT study, led by Dr. Cecilia Lee at the University of Washington, aims to provide insights on how ophthalmic conditions such as glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy can provide early indicators to Alzheimer's disease. As part of this project, the FAIR Data Innovations Hub is leading the development of the Envision Portal.
What is the Eye ACT study?
The Eye ACT study investigates the relationship between eye health and cognitive decline. It aims to identify biomarkers in the eye that can predict the onset of Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative conditions.
What is the Envision Portal?
The Envision Portal is an open-source platform designed to streamline the management and sharing of eye imaging data. It will help researchers manage, curate, and share their data following the FAIR principles so that datasets are AI-ready and reusable.
What challenges does it address?
There is currently no platform that helps make eye imaging data FAIR. The Envision Portal enables that through intuitive user interfaces and automation so that making eye imaging data FAIR requires minimal time and effort from researchers.
Why is this important?
Creating FAIR and AI-ready datasets is crucial for collaborating more effectively, leveraging AI technologies, and accelerating discoveries that could lead to better diagnostic tools and treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
Snapshot of the Eye ACT project
Early impact and study scale
0
+
Participants in the study
0
+
Patient visits
0
GB
Data collected
Development approach
All software and tools developed by our team for the Eye ACT project, including the Envision Portal, are developed using an open-source approach. This enables transparency, reuse, and collaboration with the broader open-source community.
Explore the Eye ACT GitHub organization
Funding
Our contribution to the Eye ACT project is funded through a subaward from the National Institute on Aging (NIA) grant R01AG060942.
Explore the award on NIH Reporter
Team
Members
Researchers, engineers, and collaborators behind this project.
Bhavesh Patel
Sanjay Soundarajan
Aydan Gasimova
Nahid Zeinali
Dorian Portillo
Research partners
We are collaborating on this project with Dr. Cecilia Lee's team at the Computational Ophthalmology Lab (University of Washington).
Project milestones
Key milestones for the Eye ACT study and development of the Envision Portal.
Milestone
1
Development of the Envision Portal
September 2024
Development of the Envision Portal begins as part of the Eye ACT study, focusing on building FAIR and AI-ready workflows for eye imaging data.
1
Impact related to this project
Showing
3
publications
View all our impact
↗
Publicly Available Imaging Datasets for Age-related Macular Degeneration: Evaluation according to the Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable (FAIR) Principles
Open
Copy
2025
Journal Articles
Gim, N., Ferguson, A., Blazes, M., Soundarajan, S., Gasimova, A., Jiang, Y., Sanchez Gutiérrez, C., Zalunardo, L., Corradetti, G., Elze, T., Honda, N., Waheed, N., Cairns, A. M., C., Lee, A. Y., Sadda, S. R., Keenan, T. D. L., Patel, B., & Lee, C. S., on behalf of the Ryan Initiative For Macular Research (RIMR) Consortium. (2025). Experimental Eye Research, 110342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2025.110342
Eye ACT Home Page
Open
Copy
2025
Software
Eye ACT Home Page (started 2025). https://github.com/EyeACT/eyeactstudy.org (Development status: Active)
Envision Portal
Open
Copy
2024
Software
Envision Portal (started 2024). https://github.com/EyeACT/envision-portal (Development status: Active)
